# Early-detection-of-Diabetic-Retinopathy-using-CNN
Diabetes is a critical chronic health disease that is characterized by elevated blood sugar levels. Diabetes patients are more widespread today than ever before, and their numbers are skyrocketing. Inadequate treatments might result in visual deterioration and possibly permanent vision loss. Sadly, determining the exact level of diabetic retinopathy is extremely difficult and needs experienced human analysis of retinal images. Streamlining the diagnostic process is significant and can benefit millions of individuals. This study present a deep learning approach to automatic screening of diabetic retinopathy. This study proposes three deep learning architectures, including customized Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), VGG16, and AlexNet. The recommended method is tested using several openly accessible retinal images datasets from Kaggle. As a result, this study includes two distinct classification challenges. It starts with binary classification, which classifies retinal images into either 0 or 1 values, stating that the output from the last layer is either DR or no DR. Then it moves onto multi label classification, which classifies high-resolution retinal images into five disease levels based on severity. We conducted comparison studies to validate the model’s efficiency. The metrics chosen for model evaluation are the Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Accuracy. In Binary Classification, Customized CNN is producing highest accuracy of 74%. Similarly for multi classification images were normalized through Gaussian filter and those images were then evaluated through three models discussed where VGG16 produced highest accuracy of 73% and was proved to be better for multi classification with great loss and accuracy curves.
